Hi, I'm Lisa Garr, host
of Gaiam Inspirations.
Welcome to our beautiful
Los Angeles studio.
In 1997, "The Four Agreements"
was written by Toltec Shaman,
Don Miguel Ruiz, and spent
seven years on the New
York Times bestseller list.
And today, I'm very honored
to be joined by Don Miguel
Ruiz and his son,
Don Miguel Ruiz, Jr.,
to share the wisdom of the
centuries-old Toltec tradition
that serves as a guide to an
individual's personal freedom.
Don Miguel Jr. actually
has a new book out called,
"The Five Levels of Attachment
: Toltec Wisdom for the Modern
World", which explores the
concept of how our attachments
have created our reality.
Welcome to the show.
Thank you so much, both
of you, for being here.
Thank you so much
for having us.
This is a great honor.
Oh, the honor is mine.
It's a big pressure to
be on this with your show.
Well I love learning
from you, and I've
enjoyed your book so much.
And I'm going to start
with you, actually,
Don Miguel Sr. When you were
raised, where were you raised?
In what area?
Well I grew up in Tijuana.
Even that-- I was born in
Guadalajara, but legally
I am from Tijuana.
Then I was raised until
I was 13, 14 years old.
And then we moved to Mexico City
where my brothers were studying
for-- to be medical doctors.
And later on, I also
became a medical doctor,
just following their guide.
You've-- I heard you refer
to yourself once as Dr.
Ruiz and you were a
neurosurgeon, or--
Yes.
How many years?
Well, it's-- it's hard
to really remember.
Maybe I practice to
surgery with my brothers
like for four or five years,
maybe then six years .
And one of my brothers
is a neurosurgeon,
and the other is an
oncologist associate.
Then I was part of
their team, which
means that I did a
lot of neurosurgeries
with my brother, Carlos.
I did not know that about you.
And when you were
raised, you were raised
with the Toltec tradition.
In some ways, I think the
modern family has lost a lot
of tradition, here in the US.
What ways did you remember
as meaningful in your life,
when you were raised?
Well mainly, it's
about respect.
I see how my parents treat each
other with a lot of respect.
How they treat the children
with a lot of respect.
And also how they treat
the rest of their relatives
and their friends
with a lot of respect.
And of course everybody
respects them, like everybody
call my father Don Ruiz.
And there's a lot of
respect for my father
that people-- that people have.
That is-- I love.
And now how did you
transfer that on when
you're raising your children?
Your son, and you
have-- we actually have
a picture of your two sons.
There's actually three
sons that you have,
Don Miguel, Don Jose--
And Leo.
And how did you
raise your children?
Well, we never planned
how to raise the children.
You know?
When I have my-- my first child,
I had no experience at all.
Then it's about the action.
It's-- it's about
how we love them.
I remember having Miguel in my
hands when finally he was born.
And I take him out,
there was a full moon,
and I offered him to the moon.
I say, he's alive.
And he will go around the
world, sharing himself.
And have you raised--
now you have two
children as well, don't you?
-Yes.
I have my son, Alejandro,
and my little girl, Audrey.
They're both seven and five.
And it's nice.
You know, like that story
that my father was telling me.
Like when I held my son
for the very first time,
a huge realization came upon me.
I have no idea what I'm doing.
No idea.
And then, all of a
sudden, it dawned on me
that he has no idea what
he has been doing for,
what, at the time, 30 years?
We would play it by ear.
The thing about raising a child
is that we grab from what we
know, from our family, from
our friends, from everyone's
giving us advice.
And we use what we apply.
The question is, do we impose
an image onto our kids?
Or do I engage my
child, and my child
tells me what he or she needs?
And, to me, that's how I've
really learned from my dad,
how to raise my kids
in-- for who they are.
It starts with
accepting who they are,
to love them for who
they are, and raise
them as they-- as they are.
-As they are.
Now did you-- have
a lot of you--
you are so wonderful
to share so many family
photos with us, which I
really, really appreciate.
Because we get a
glimpse into your lives.
Did you used to take your sons
on a lot of journeys together?
We have a picture here of you.
I think you were
in a-- in a cave.
Definitely.
I just come in my
memory something
that I really like a lot.
The first time that I have his
son, Alejandro, in my hands,
and I say, wow, he is--
he is so beautiful.
Then I put him in his
hand and say, now--
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
You remember that.
What do you mean,
domesticate him?
Well, when my dad taught me
that-- because in "The Four
Agreements", he talks about
letting go of domestication.
And then he went to
me and says, Miguel,
domesticated your child.
And the reason why
he told me that
is because, if I'm not going
to domesticate my child,
someone else will.
Exactly.
But the question is, how?
Life teaches us, or domesticates
us in its own way, which
is called action-reaction.
For every action
we take, there is
a consequence, and a reaction.
This is how life teaches
us from our mistakes,
from our-- how we learn.
And we build from that.
Whereas, the domestication
my father talks
about in "The Four
Agreements", and throughout,
is based on conditional love.
A system of reward and
punishment for everything--
if we do something right, the
reward is our own acceptance.
If we do something wrong,
the punishment is rejection.
Since we're emotional
beings, that acceptance
feels like love.
If we do it wrong,
that rejection
feels like the opposite.
So we're talking
about domestication
through conditional love.
So when my father's telling
me, domesticate your child,
he's telling me, engage and
teach them how to live in life.
Do it in your own way,
but always become aware
that how I do it, do I do
it with conditional love,
or unconditional, which is
accepting him for who he is.
So still allow him to
make his own mistakes,
fall on his knees,
do whatever he
needs to do to learn self-love,
but yet, be there as a support.
Yeah because--
-Not do it for him.
-Exactly.
Because the world around him--
and I know this for a fact,
because I had him as a father--
but I still was domesticated.
I still fell into conditional
love through my friends,
through our school,
through pop culture,
through my-- you know,
like I-- I remember
my rebellion with my family.
Having the juxtaposition
of love between my father,
and my grandmother, my
mother, and my cousins,
and then having the conditional
acceptance of friends.
You know, and with our
friends in high school--
I'm going to use an
example of junior high
because the reward for
living up the expectation
is popularity, acceptance.
Cool.
If you do not, then you're
a square, you're a nerd,
you're a geek, and
you're chastised.
So basically, without
separation, the world
out there is ready to
domesticate us according
to its own conditions.
And the question
is, are-- is there
going to be a counterbalance?
So for me, my father's and
my grandmother's teaching
was that counterbalance.
But at the same time,
being the eldest,
I also got to witness my
own father's transformation.
I remember the man before
he started his journey.
I remember the man
who was still doctor.
And I remember as
a six-year-old,
and a seven-year-old, and
an eight-year-old, that guy.
Then he began his journey.
I remember the day when he
let go of medicine, my mom's
reaction, my grandma's
reaction, everyone's reaction,
and-- and you're
going to go do what?
And--
So did it register
to you as fear?
Change?
Well, for me, yes,
because it was everything--
the whole world shifted for us.
But at the same time, at
a-- watching his transition,
watching his movement,
all of a sudden
allowed me to witness
something incredible,
which is the blossoming of this
man, right here, right now.
So for me, having that
combination of how
my dad domesticated
me in my own life,
going from conditional
domestication
when I was a kid,
like eight-years-old,
seven-years-old,
then watching him,
throughout my
teenage years, shift.
And then watching him, because
I was already in my late teens
or 20s when he became a
master, and how he domesticated
and educated my younger
brother, in particular, Leo,
how that bridge was different.
And watching that for
myself, especially as I'm
raising my own kid, allows
me the juxtaposition
of those two things.
Now when you went
through that time
and that period of rebellion.
Was that your journey,
in order to see
what was-- what the difference
was out there, in the world?
So that's kind of what
you're talking about--
Yeah.
Exactly.
--about domestication.
Is to go out through
your own hero's journey
or to go out through
your own, but up against,
where do I begin and
the world begins?
Or end, and the world begins?
We start to make
those directions.
Exactly.
And you can say that if--
if there's anything that's
different from me growing
up in this family,
in comparison to anyone else,
something I never realized,
until just recently,
is that having grown up
with the teachings,
having grown up with this,
I use the teachings
to domesticate me.
I ended up using these teachings
as my own conditioning.
Imagine using, be
impeccable with the word,
always doing your best,
don't make assumptions--
You were raised with that.
--don't take
things personally.
But instead of seeing it as the
instruments of transformation
that they are, I saw it as my
father telling me what to do.
"The Four Agreements"
came out in 1997,
and when I started
reading it, it was
my dad telling me what to do.
I put it down, because
to me, it was speaking
to me as my father, to son.
As I grew older, and
I began to really go--
I guess you were saying my
hero's journey, my own life,
and all of a sudden,
everything began to shift.
Something in my life
happened, and all of a sudden,
I reached out and
I grabbed the book,
and I saw it the way a
lot of people in the world
saw it, as instruments
for transformation.
I saw it from a
totally different way.
Before that, I had this
image of what I had--
I was supposed to live up to.
This p-- this pedestal, I am
the son of Don Miguel Ruiz,
and I have to live up
to this expectation.
All-- all the while, I'm using
this false image to justify,
and my conditional
love for myself.
I domesticated myself anyways.
That is-- now when you were
going through that transition,
from the medical doctor
into being a Shaman, and now
[INAUDIBLE] as you--
as you've taught me,
what was your transition about?
Why did you go through
that transition?
Why did you leave medicine
the way that you knew it?
Well, like a-- it's
easy to understand
that I was more interested
in understanding
how the human mind works.
And by exploring
the human mind, I
was transforming myself, also.
So it was your own inner
journey that caused it.
Definitely.
It starts shifting,
because, like we say,
practice makes the master.
Then, when everybody was
reflecting in me, whatever
their problems they
have in their life,
then as soon as I
give them solutions,
I see the solutions
for myself, also.
Then I-- I was shifting,
shifting, shifting,
until the moment that everyone--
everything was so clear for me.
To see the human mind
is like an open book,
and is a very predictable.
Because we all are the same,
but only little things change.
Then you can see, more or
less, the future of a person,
if you see the mistakes that
they're making right now.
Explain.
For example, let's
say that you start
eating hamburgers every day.
And you start gaining
weight, and gaining weight.
You can see that
in certain time,
you're going to
have a heart attack.
So the mistakes
that I'm making now
will be the demise of my future.
But if at a certain moment,
you have the awareness,
and say, uh oh, I
will watch what I eat,
then the future will change.
It's that discipline
that you're talking about.
That self disciplined,
very important in--
But we need the awareness.
Because without awareness,
you cannot make changes.
You can almost say it's
like that aha moment.
You know?
Like-- in continuing
that image that my dad
was using with hamburgers.
And one moment, out of the blue,
you realize what you're doing.
You're seeing the truth of the
consequence of our actions.
At one point, when we see
that rec-- recognition,
and see the results of
it, we have a choice.
Do I continue to eat
this way, or do I
make the choice and I shift.
You've-- you really are
describing a little bit
of the hero's
journey of what you
have went through when you made
your transition from medicine.
Even though it was still carried
on through your-- your life,
it was a beginning.
That you went to this
change and this shift.
You did, as well, went
through this shift.
And it's part of the human mind
to go through that journey,
isn't it?
-Oh, definitely.
But first you need
to have awareness.
Otherwise you never will--
the shift will not happen,
but the transformation
took on anyway.
Anyway.
For as long as we live,
life continues to move,
and as we go through
life, we learn.
The question is, are we paying
attention, or we're not?
Like he said, it depends
on your yes and your no's.
Your yes and your no's?
Your yes and your no's
Like-- with every yes
I do, for example,
with every yes I say,
something will be done.
I will be able to
manifest something.
With every no I give,
something won't be done.
So yes and my no
becomes the instruments
of my transformation.
We can simply say,
the instruments
by which I construct the dream
of my life, my masterpiece.
Because there's nothing
in my belief system
that I didn't say yes to.
Even the no's or the
negatives in my mind,
at the very root of
it, there's a yes.
It's a choice, right?
In my life-- yes, a choice.
It's an engagement.
You can say that that's
how the world functions.
Like for example, if we
go outside of our home,
and we look around
the neighborhood,
we see the buildings that we,
as a community, said yes to.
What we don't see are the
buildings we, as a community,
said no to.
Our yes creates, and
our no's doesn't.
So at our personal level, as
the individual, what I manifest
is the expression of
my yes, my intent.
What I don't manifest is the
manifestation of my intent
as well, which is, I don't put
my energy in creating that.
You can say this is
how I move my body.
There's a difference between me
and this an inanimate object.
I have this intents by
which I can live life,
and I choose how I construct
it, how I move it, how I shift.
Even now, I'm putting
air into my diaphragm,
slowly letting it out.
The vocal cords in my throat,
the muscles in my mouth,
play together to express
an idea, in a language.
This is me, intent,
expressing, saying, yes.
I control it.
And that's how I
interact with the world.
And if I respect my yes and my
no, I'm able to respect yours.
And between each
other's respect,
we build the dream of us.
So every action that
you make is a choice.
That makes you a lot more
accountable in life, actually.
That really does.
So with that the
basis of the book
"The Five Levels of Attachment"?
-Yes.
Tell me--
You can say that
that's exactly it.
My grandmother,
my first teacher,
taught me this
question, which is
the driving force of the book.
We actually have a
beautiful picture of your--
Yes, that's my
beautiful grandma.
Your grandmother.
And Don Miguel,
your dad, and your--
-My son, Alejandro.
-Your son, Alejandro.
He's just a few months old.
It's beautiful.
It's a--
-Thank you.
- --a very personal picture.
I appreciate, and that is
three generations right there.
And the lesson that she asked
me is, do I control knowledge
or does knowledge control me?
If we use the example of,
if I control my yes and no,
then I can use my knowledge
to be the instrument
by which I navigate the world.
Because my knowledge allows
me to understand the world,
allows me to see the world,
and for me to understand it.
If I'm so attached to knowledge,
knowledge now forces my hand,
and controls my yes,
and controls my no.
So throughout the
levels of attachment,
you can say Level One,
The Authentic Self.
The answer to the question,
do I control knowledge or does
knowledge control me,
is that I am life,
regardless of what
I know, I am a life.
I am this body.
I am here.
So that is knowledge
controlling you?
That's me
controlling knowledge.
But more importantly, it's me
recognizing that I am life,
and that knowledge
exists because I exist.
Every single thought in my
mind, every single belief
that I have, has power because
I get that power with my life.
So at Level Two, Preference, the
ability that I still recognize
and, answering the question is,
I recognize that I am a life,
yet I'm going to
engage the world.
Using knowledge, I'm going
to attach, invest in myself,
and detach when the moment
is no longer present.
When the moment has passed.
So I will use knowledge as an
instrument by which I function.
At Level Three, Identity, I use
knowledge to identify myself.
You could say that this is the
beginning, or the mid-round,
where knowledge and
I are intertwined.
And everything I
know describes me.
You can be in the direction of
my preference, or in my choices
in life, but at Level
Four, Internalization,
I use knowledge to
give me the rules
of my own self-acceptance.
It gives me the rules of
how I should live my life.
Basically, domestication.
This is when
domestication comes in,
and the conditions of
my own self-acceptance
really given in the
form of my knowledge.
So at this point, knowledge is
starting to control my actions.
In order to be acceptable, by my
own point of view and my peers,
I have to live up
to what I know.
Like you had done
when you were a child.
Exactly.
Level Five, Fanaticism.
I'm so attached to knowledge
that knowledge controls my
every action, without a doubt.
It's the distortion of
knowledge, because now,
where knowledge no longer
reflects life as is.
Because the function
of knowledge
is for us to
understand the world,
to understand each other.
But when I'm so
attached to knowledge,
my personal importance, my
ego, will distort what I see,
and I can force it to fit
what I want it to see,
and reject anything else.
It's the rigidness, you
can say, to the point
where, an idea is more
important than my own life.
You talked about that a little
bit in "The Four Agreements",
didn't you?
About the attachment
to-- to knowledge,
but it was described as-- as
don't take anything personally.
Is that where it was described?
Well, when I say,
don't make assumptions--
Don't make assumptions.
Yes.
--even deeper into
what knowledge is,
and what I say is that, when we
were born, we had no knowledge.
We create knowledge, and then
when we give our personal power
to knowledge, and
knowledge becomes
the biggest tyrant in our life.
And knowledge
creates our identity.
What we believe we are.
So do you live
without knowledge, now?
No.
I use knowledge.
Otherwise I cannot speak to you.
Right.
Then knowledge follows
whatever duration I want to go.
But you're detached from
it, at the same time, right?
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
--the things,
like could say that
there's a separation between
me, life, and knowledge.
Because what is knowledge?
Knowledge is a
symbol that allows
us to understand the world.
You can say that it
allows us to comprehend
how the universe works.
It allows us to
comprehend each other,
and through that we make the
agreements by which we create
this society, this culture.
Everything around this
city, in Los Angeles,
was created by a yes and a no.
But the thing about
knowledge is that it's
subjugate to an agreement.
You can say even a
word, its definition
is completely subjugate
to a community's agreement
of what that word means.
So in essence, everything we
know, every single concept,
is an expression of
the agreements of us,
as the dreams-- as human
beings coming together,
saying this is what
this word means.
I can say, this is a
sofa, this is a shirt,
and there's things that
aren't tangible like that.
There's love, there's justice.
So its definition is how we
allow ourselves to comprehend.
Now when you have
something that changeable,
it's not really set, because
an agreement can always change.
Well like we see in this
picture, with your dad,
with your son,
and he's-- are you
imparting knowledge unto
your-- to your grandson
in this picture?
Is that what you're talking
about, is that intangible
knowledge?
Well, I am loving
him unconditionally.
You know, it's like a-- if you
want to learn any language,
you take this object, you
don't know how to say it,
and someone come and say vaso.
-Vaso.
Now it's an agreement.
That is now vaso.
Now it's vaso.
in English, it's glass.
In Spanish, it's vaso.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
Now if you get it right,
you get the reward.
Yay. [CLAPPING]
And if you get to wrong, oh no.
Try again.
It's, see my lips, vaso.
Vaso.
Yay. [CLAPPING]
Every single part of
knowledge is an agreement.
It's still difficult to
learn a new language.
Then when you see a child
try to learn a language,
you'll see them make
a lot of mistakes.
It is so funny to see them--
But it's so beautiful,
because that's
how they relate to the world.
Things have labels and
words attached to them,
whereas they didn't have
that 2,500 years ago.
Then they know that
this is a glass.
It is part of his knowledge.
Which is when my father
says, domesticate him,
this is exactly what
he's talking about.
Educate your child
and let them see it.
Now the question is, how?
Because, as simple
as that was, there
sometimes goes to the extremes.
With every punishment,
oh, you're-- you can
see I could be very abusive.
I can punish him
with so much thing,
and I can fill him
with guilt, with shame,
with all these self-doubts.
And this is how we
acquire our knowledge.
The question is, how?
And an attachment, if you
can see how our knowledge is
completely subjugate
to an agreement
and can change at
any given moment,
an attachment is when we bring
something that's foreign,
and we make it part of us.
We bring it in.
And one of the things that
happens when we get attached
is, we don't want it to change.
Because if it changes,
what does it say about me?
So we attach ourselves to our
knowledge, and when we do that,
one of the worst things that
can happen is for it to change.
Because if it's wrong, what
does that say about me?
If it's right, well then I'm
better than everyone else.
And all of a sudden,
that's the war
that we have in our society.
Who can domesticate who?
Who can impose their
will on to someone,
and who's going to subjugate?
When you have two people trying
to impose onto each other,
we have conflict.
Who's going to domesticate
until someone gives in?
Well for the example of your
grandmother, your mother.
When she taught you
traditional ways-- and we
have a picture of her in a
wonderful, traditional outfit.
How do you take that
knowledge that she taught you,
and use that to guide you,
and also, at the same time,
let it go?
How do you detach from it?
Well, at the thing about it
is, one, the way my grandmother
taught-- this is the same
thing as my dad-- by action.
You can say, let's
use an example
that, when she began to teach
me was through translation.
I had to translate
for her because she
didn't speak any English.
So she only spoke Spanish.
So I had to speak for--
translate for her.
And sometimes she
would get inspired,
and she'd just go off, and
I have to try to catch up.
I was listening to
everything she was saying,
and I was processing
everything she
was saying, that
eventually I wasn't
listening to her anymore.
I was listening to my
own mind, processing it.
When my grandma
asked me, why do you
think you're having
so many problems
with translating my words?
I said, it's because
you're not giving
me a chance to translate.
You're going too fast.
And she said, are
you using knowledge,
or is knowledge using you?
Meaning by that, are you
listening to life, which
is my voice, or
are you listening
to your mind, which is
telling you how it should be.
Because if you're
paying attention
to your mind of
how it should be,
then you're no longer
listening to me.
That makes sense.
She's a very wise woman.
Exactly.
She said, imagine
doing that to life.
You live life and you
process everything,
and you're completely
contemplating everything
so much that life
continues to move on,
and you've got behind on
something of what happened,
and you're trying
to understand it.
You're no longer
listening to life.
In fact, you're going to
impose what you know onto life,
and you're no longer
going to see it.
She told me, learn to listen.
Imagine that my voice
is the first thing
you hear in your mind,
and open your mouth,
and say it in English.
I was able to actually
get to the point
where, as she began to use the
first letters of each word,
I was already translating it.
She is such a wise woman,
and this picture is such
a wonderful picture of her.
And this is the way she
taught me how to meditate,
how to quiet the mind, how to
quiet everything around me.
Because I had to completely
shut everything around me
and listen.
This was her way of
teaching me how to meditate.
Something that, as I was a
young, I didn't understand.
But in that moment of transition
in my life, all of a sudden
it dawned on me, that
that's what I'm doing.
I'm projecting onto the world.
I have my own narrators
in my own mind, the voice
of my knowledge, in the
form of my thoughts,
describing everything of
how the world should be.
And life is what it is.
And when I'm fighting the world,
as this is how it should be,
then I'm going in complete
disharmony with the world,
because I'm not
paying attention.
Is-- is your life a
walking meditation?
Do you live in this
beautiful space of your heart
all the time?
Or do you have moments to take
you out of that, Don Miguel?
Well, it's very rare for sure.
Is it?
Mikey?
-For him?
Is it rare?
That he has--
Moments that takes him-- takes
him out of his heart space?
I would say, there are
moments where, when he's tired
and he's sleepy, when his
awareness is kind of a weak,
that sometimes, you know
like any-- any person who
gets tired, gets cranky.
There's some moments like that.
But it was one of
the things in life,
if he-- Let's imagine
awareness like a flower.
When we're completely open,
and we, all of a sudden,
we get attached, and
sometimes life happens,
our awareness closes.
And as we get attached,
this is the only way.
Then all of a sudden, we have
that aha moment in our life.
All of a sudden, we
realize we're tired,
or we realize that we're
hungry, or we realize that we're
attaching-- translating the
world, we have that aha moment
and we have a choice.
We can either stay in
that space of anger,
or frustration, or whatever
that is, attachment,
and we begin to let go.
Because things don't
always go your way.
I mean, flights
aren't always on time.
And there's schedules that
get changed, and turned
upside down, and so forth.
How do you handle that?
Well, when you become
fluid as-- as to water,
everything becomes
extremely easy.
You see an obstacle, you
don't face the obstacle,
you go around.
And you go for the goal
that you want to reach.
Then you-- let's say that
you intend to get something.
You don't know how
you're going to get it,
but for sure you're
going to get it.
Because life will bring
many different events
that can distract you and try
to take you to another place.
And maybe sometimes when
you're in another place,
you find out that this is
not exactly what you wanted.
Then you will take you for
what you really wanted.
That it-- but you need
to be fluid, instead
of having the resistance.
It-- that happen when you
master transformation.
You become that fluid.
You do an enormous amount
of travel, and in your life,
you have lineages that
go to 116 years old.
I mean, you have a wonderful
longevity in your family.
But you are still in a
vigorous travel schedule,
and you still both travel
all over the world.
How is it that you practice The
Four Agreements in your life?
I will ask you.
I don't even think about it.
It's just what I am.
I will-- I never would
think, oh, I will take things
personally or not, I
would take something
and going to make assumptions.
No, it's-- I'm
just whatever I am.
You know, many
people ask me, OK,
Miguel, what is what you are?
And I can use knowledge in
order to justify my existance.
But it will be a lie.
Because the truth is that
I have no idea what I am.
I don't know what I am, and it's
not relevant to know what I am.
You could almost
say that my identity
as an empty definition who's
subject to my own agreement.
Whatever I say yes.
Because an identity would be
an attachment to who you are,
right?
And that's the thing.
If I'm completely aware
that I'm the one saying yes,
that it's my agreement,
then at any given moment,
I can say, no.
I can change it.
You can say-- let's use the
example of The Four Agreements
as the four conditions,
the way I was talking about
earlier, when I was growing up.
How do I detach
myself from that?
Well, if I apply the Five
Levels of Attachment,
I recognize that
I'm at Level Four.
I'm not completely
at Level Five,
otherwise I'm fighting
with everyone.
But I recognize
that's what I'm doing.
The thing about
transformation it start--
you can see it two ways.
I can transform because I
have to, in order to live up
to an expectation,
which basically,
I'm repeating the concept
of cycle of domestication.
Or I see it from a
totally different way.
Transformation, from
the point of view,
I accept myself for who I
am, at this very moment,
attachment and all.
I attach my-- I
accept that I'm not
being impeccable with my word.
I accept that I'm not being--
I'm taking things personally.
I accept that I'm
not doing my best.
This is who I am at
this very moment.
This is who I am.
At this very moment,
I can make a choice.
I can continue to do this, and
be at this level of attachment,
or I could say, I'm
going to change.
Not because I have to,
but because I want to.
What about when other people
in your circle are attached,
and are in that place?
Well, that's actually
a very great thing
because one of the realizations
about transformation,
at least from my point of view,
is recognizing one great truth.
I'm only responsible for myself.
The power over anyone
ends at the fingertip
of my-- of my finger.
I have no power over my dad.
I have no power over you.
I don't even have
power over anyone.
The thing about it is
that, at that moment,
I realized that the only person
I am really responsible for
is me.
I take care of my kids
because I love them,
and I've decided to engage
in being a father with them.
If I didn't want to be a
father, I could leave them.
But I want to be a father,
so I'm going to engage.
With that being said,
in my saying yes,
in me approaching and reaching,
allows me to completely take
full responsibility and take
on the power that is me,
my intent.
When I decide to
transform, when I
decide to let go
of an attachment,
I break the cycle
of domestication.
And all of a sudden,
I do things because I
recognize that my yes is
what is driving me to create.
My intent, my free will.
And when I say no, it's
because I want to say no.
And I accept myself, both
the good, I accept the bad.
I accept the ugly.
I accept myself as perfect,
because I am a life, not
because I'm perfect,
according to the judge,
or what I'm supposed to be.
I'm simply perfect
because I'm alive,
and as long as I'm alive,
I can evolve and change.
Because life evolves and
changes continuously.
Now you said yes in many
different ways in your life,
to teaching, to-- to
inspiring many, many people.
You also, I understand,
in December of last year,
you had a wonderful trip that
you took with a lot of people
around the ending of
the Mayan calendar.
Can you share with us a little
bit about that experience?
Well, you know, a calendar, it
was made just to measure time.
Not to make prophecies.
This is something that
we need to understand.
We love to measure time.
Many people use calendars in
order to create prophecies.
OK?
And it's not the ones
who create the calendar,
but other people who
use it to prophesize
in-- by-- with the Mayans.
They prophesize the
end of the world.
Which is great.
I think it's wonderful,
but not the-- the way
that people take it.
You know?
The end of the world--
What did that mean?
OK.
Congratulations.
It means, depending who
is-- who it's talking about.
But in the mystery schools,
you know, like the Assyrians,
the-- the-- the Egyptians, the
Greeks, the Toltecs, the ones
who are prepared for
that, the highest point
is the end of the world.
But the world is the
one that we create.
It's our creation.
It's our own mind.
It's the story of our self.
This is our world.
And every human
creates his own world.
It doesn't mean the end
of the planet earth.
It doesn't mean the
end of humanity.
It means the end of the world.
Our world.
You can say-- you
can say-- you can
it in this way, like,
there's a description called
the individual dream and
the dream of the planet.
When we talk about the
world, we're talking
about the individual dream.
The mind's job is to dream,
to perceive, and to project.
This is what we
understand as dreaming.
We dream in a physical matter.
We dream when we're
asleep, and we daydream.
But I'm the constant
point between the two.
What is the personal,
individual dream?
It's expressing something
my dad always says.
If I'm the one talking in
my mind, who's listening?
Me.
I'm listening.
Well, if I'm the one
listening, who is talking?
Me.
I am.
In [INAUDIBLE] we
see the relationship
between mind, body, and spirit.
The relationship between me,
life, and my mind, knowledge.
You can almost say, that's
exactly what knowledge is.
Back to knowledge.
Knowledge is the construction
of everything I believe,
and I've said yes, and
forms my belief system.
That's a great
definition right there.
So basically when my dad says,
it's the end of the world,
it's that moment when we
become aware that my world,
what I know, is completely
subjugated to my will, which
is my yes.
Everything I know, every belief.
When I recognize the separation
between me, mind, and me,
life, just like the
expression, I am not this body,
I'm also not this mind.
At the very moment, a cycle
ends and a new one begins.
Is that what the people
experienced that came
with you to the journey?
Because we have wonderful
pictures of your experience
in Teotihuacan?
In Teotihuacan, yes.
In Mexico, and you
took a group of people
there right around the
time of the prophesied end
of the Mayan calendar.
Which I understand now,
prophecy is up to each
of the person's opinion.
As many prophecies are.
So the group that
you took there, I
know it was a huge celebration,
because I got to broadcast
live from there, which was
the-- you looked like you
were having the best time.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
-Tell me--
It was cold, but it was good.
Tell me what this picture is?
This is an amazing shot
of you at the base of one
of the Mayan pyramids,
is that right?
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
Pyramid of the Sun.
That's me and my cousin.
And we're sitting
at the very bottom
of The Pyramid of the Sun,
celebrating a transition.
And this was on the
21st of December, 2012?
Yes. -Right around that time?
And now here's an overhead
shot of the pyramid, where
you're sitting at the steps of.
Tell me about this,
Don Miguel, Sr.
Oh, OK.
Well there's something
that I'd never
seen in the-- in the--
archaeological books
but it has the shape of a human.
The stairs makes a
shape of a human.
You can see in there--
in the-- in the bottom,
the little square that
looks like a head.
Beside that, you'll see the
stairs in both directions that
looks like arms.
Then coming out to
the pyramid, you'll
see the big stairs that have
the shape of a-- of a body.
Then keep going up, you'll see
a couple of stairs that are
parallel and looks like legs.
And the last stairs that go
to the top of the pyramid,
it's only one and looks
like a piece of wood.
Then beside of the head, you can
see like a piece of wood, also.
Like arms stretched out.
And it looks like the
Christ on the-- on the cross
at the moment of his death.
Now did you realize that
when you were standing
on top of this pyramid?
You looked down and you saw
the embodiment of Christ
on the cross?
Well, I see a--
An image.
I see the similitude
of the Christ
in the shape of the stairs,
but it was built 500 years
before the birth of Jesus.
But the meaning,
because it's a symbol,
the meaning is-- it
symbolized the-- the shape
of a human who is at the
very top of a pyramid,
reaching in the sun.
And what-- what looks like
an aura, is the sun itself.
It's the shape of the sun.
Was-- do you think
it was intentionally
designed that way?
-Definitely.
-Yes.
It's meant to represent
an individual ascending.
You know that moment where we
have that moment of a cycle.
When we talked about
the end of the cycle,
when we recognize that
I am not the mind,
it also represents the beginning
of a new way of seeing life.
A moment of awareness.
This moment, it represents
that moment of transcendence,
where all of a sudden,
I am completely
aware that I'm alive, and
I am in constant communion.
We can say that it looks
like the figure of Christ,
because we're familiar
with that figure,
so project that image
onto that, because that's
what we recognize.
Especially if we grew up with
that beautiful tradition.
And it's meant to
represent almost
the same thing,
which is basically,
that moment of
ascension, of divinity.
And for us, in our
tradition, is that moment
where we become alive.
That we're completely aware
that I am in control of my yes.
That, in my brief system,
there is nothing in my mind
I said no.
Do you suppose that these
were the teachings 500
years before Christ, when
these pyramids were built?
And we have a picture
of-- of the pyramids.
Well you could say that,
because I-- I wasn't alive
when that, so anything
I can say from that time
is basically a story,
or something I've read.
But it makes sense.
But it's a beautiful story to
tell, because it makes sense.
Because the
beautiful thing about
our tradition is that
it's an oral tradition.
Every generation tells it in
a way that makes sense to us.
You can even say with my
father-- like one of the things
that he did-- there's
two books in particular.
A book called-- by Mary Carroll
Nelson called, "Beyond Fear",
and "The Four Agreements."
In "Beyond Fear", he talks
a lot about the Teotihuacan
Tezcatlipoca plain.
He talked a lot about
that old Shaman tradition.
But my father found
that a lot of people
were becoming fanatical
about that kind of teaching,
so he shifted the teaching.
He let's go of a lot
of that symbology,
and just stripped it
down to a language
that's common sense, at least
to my father's point of view.
And The Four
Agreements were born.
And you can say
that each generation
shares it in his own way.
If Don Ezekiel was
around and teaching us,
he was say-- he would speak to
us in the language in the 1800s
and the beginning of the 1900s.
Something that was
relevant in their own life.
Don [INAUDIBLE],
which is his son,
teach-- taught it
in his own way.
When my grandmother
began to teach it,
it was dramatically different
from that of Don Ezekiel.
And by the time my
dad grabbed it, it
was incredibly different, one.
Because it's in English,
but also because he's
speaking to a whole
different audience.
And when me and my
brother teacher it,
it's even dramatically
different from me
and Jose, because we all
interpret it different.
That's how it's passed down.
The reason why is because, at
the essence of the tradition,
there's a lesson of life.
It's a combination
of life teaching us,
and there's the
teachings that allows
us to function in that world.
Yet life will still approach us.
As for example, the
story of "The Five Levels
of Attachment", if I put it
my-- in the old Toltec language,
it is the story of Tezcatlipoca,
the Smoking Mirror.
If I use the example
of the question of,
as I increase my
level of attachment
to a point where I can't see
anything but the illusion,
but my attachment, in the
story of Tezcatlipoca,
if I do it backwards, going
from Level Five to Level One,
the image of Tezcatlipoca
is, I see nothing but smoke.
I'm not even aware that there's
a mirror in front of me.
Because that's what Tezcatlipoca
is, the Smoking Mirror.
It's the reflection
that I can't see,
because I have all this
distortion around me.
To break through the
smoke, I create doubt.
Be skeptical, but
learn to listen.
And all of a sudden, the--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
The smoke begins to clear,
and there is a reflection.
At Level Four, I believe the
reflection to be the truth,
and it's giving
me the conditions
of my own self acceptance.
When i let go of
that, all of a sudden,
there's a shift that happens
from Level Four to Level Three.
I no longer need to
distort knowledge
because I'm no
longer going to use
it to give me the conditions
of my own acceptance.
And all of a sudden, I'm aware
of a clean reflection of life.
I begin to become
aware that I am life,
and that's reflecting me.
At Level Two, I become aware
of the surface of the mirror,
and knowledge, the reflection
is a complete separate thing
from me in life.
And at Level One, the mirror
disappears, and I am life.
Is-- isn't it wonderful to see
your teachings coming through?
All that you've
combined together
is such a beautiful way
of explaining things.
That was very, very clear
in explaining the levels
of attachment, and combined--
When you wrote "The Four
Agreements", I
mean that's why it
stayed on the bestseller
list for seven years,
because it's truth.
Thank you for explaining that.
It's based on years
and years of tradition,
and prophecy in
different languages,
and that type of truth,
just like the Bible,
will last for years,
and years, and years.
When-- and people have
different interpretations
of it, of course.
-Of course.
And there's different
interpretations
of my dad's book.
There's different
interpretations
of all these
wonderful teachings,
because, when we're so
attached, we distort
it to fit what we already know.
Our own reality, yes.
Basically, we're translating
everything into a language
we can understand.
And in that translation,
sometimes we
distort the meaning.
But if we let the meaning be,
and let knowledge just be what
it is, knowledge can be a clean
reflection of life, that allows
us to understand everything.
And when we let go
of that attachment,
that disharmony that
exists between us
will cease to be
there, because I no
longer have to defend anything.
And as I have this free respect
for myself, I can engage you.
Just as I respect
my yes and my no,
I'm able to respect
your yes and no.
And when we have
that mutual respect,
when we construct a dream of
us, it'll be based on harmony.
There's no longer this war.
-Right.
And when you bring these
groups, when you-- Do you all
go together when you--
when you bring the groups
and teach these types of things?
-Sometimes.
Yeah.
And I-- and you teach
to-- to entire crowds
when you're teaching.
Both of you?
-Yeah.
And uniquely as
we are-- as-- yes.
I remember you gave a
talk without words once,
and I was in the audience.
And for 20 minutes,
you communicated to us
with your eyes, and
with your heart.
And later on, you asked the
audience what you communicated?
And we, individually, were--
were able to explain exactly
what it is that you said.
There's a picture
we have here of you
doing that, of expressing and
communicating with your eyes.
It's a really beautiful
way of explaining.
How do you do that?
How do you communicate
with those messages?
Well, it's extremely simple.
First you put knowledge
aside completely.
And it's just you presence that
comes, and mesh with everyone.
You know, it's like when
you have your child.
Yes.
Your child doesn't
know how to speak,
but he has that presence, that
just his presence awake in you,
what you need to do to
communicate with your child.
And they can get it.
They get it completely.
An example is like, my son,
he's high-functioning autistic.
He's a-- he doesn't speak much.
He's verbally-- His verbal
skills are very, very minimal.
Yet, him and I
interact all the time.
He lets me know what he needs.
I can imagine, yeah.
And you know,
the thing is, when
I found out about his
condition, at first
I was totally mourning.
I was so sad, I
was so heartbroken.
And then, as I'm
watching him, and he
comes up and smiles at me, and
then I'm like, what am I doing?
What am I being so
sad, and mourning
my son-- as if I lost my son?
And then I realized,
I lost the image
I was projecting onto him.
But the beautiful moment
is that I allowed myself
the opportunity to
see him for who he is,
and here he is smiling at me.
There's no language,
but he's smiling
at me with those beautiful
eyes, and it says, Daddy.
I have everything I need.
Ah, yes.
I don't need anything.
Yes.
And basically I'm
still domesticating
my child, because I'm
helping him engage the world,
and I'm pushing.
And it's different
than my little girl,
because my little girl doesn't
have the same needs as my son.
But I'm the father to both,
and I will engage them both,
together and individual,
because they're
both individual human beings.
Just like you.
Just like my dad.
Just like anyone.
When I respect everyone's
individuality, that they're
masters of their own life,
then my ability to engage you
is by permission.
Like, I can't-- I
don't change any one.
I just say my words.
But if someone hears my words,
and they agreed with me,
they've given permission to the
words, not me, to the words,
to impact their life.
And they're going to
grab it, and they're
going to run with it.
Well, I-- I think that you
are teaching us a new way
of communication that way.
And the video that we saw with
you talking with your heart
to various people, and just
having your hand on your heart
is such a great way
of showing us how
it is possible to communicate.
And I think that's pretty much
the future of communication.
I mean, we've gone from
speaking, to cell phones,
to voice mail.
It's going to be
telepathic everything.
Telepathic voice mail,
telepathic email.
Because if we really understand
the language of the heart,
that's the only true language.
It's existed for thousands,
and thousands of years,
and will always exist.
It is truly the
language of the heart.
That's why I love your essence.
You come here with
your gratitude,
with your humbleness, with your
teachings, and your messages,
but you come with your heart.
It's the first thing I see.
When I always see you,
I get a hug from both
of you, which is wonderful.
As this is the first
time I met you,
and you still gave me a hug.
Because that's what
you do is that you
bring your heart into the
conversation before your words.
And I think that's
an incredible lesson
for people to even
learn, is that you
can communicate without words.
It's all through that--
the language of the heart.
And to me, that's the
whole point of all our work.
It's about communication.
When I first started, I thought
it was going to be something
about a metaphysical journey.
And it turned out, it's
all about the relationships
I have with the people I love.
You know, right now with the--
in the age of the internet,
theoretically, ignorance
should no longer exist.
But as we get attached,
especially when
there's so much information, we
only gravitate to what we know.
Because in them-- in a time
where communication is so open,
and we can see the
way other people
dream, the way other people
construct their lives,
if we allowed ourselves
to listen to one another,
we can create such
a beautiful thing.
And also at the time, we can see
the flip side, when we get so
attached, and
everything we believe
is going to get
challenged, of course
we're going to cling to it.
And we can see it
happening as we speak.
So it's so much
about detachment.
I mean, you should call this
"The Five Levels of De-- well,
the second book.
The sequel will be "The
Five Levels of Detachment".
And that's the thing.
It's about like,
learning how to detach
is simply recognizing that,
at any given moment in life,
a moment passes and
a new one happens.
At any given moment of
life, I can say yes,
and I can change my mind to no.
The power's always in me to
engage and disengage with will,
with intent, and with love.
And you, too.
You engage and
disengage all the time.
Exactly.
But you're always
in that heart space.
I do, I see that.
And I've traveled with
you, and I've seen you
in different
environments, and you
really have that beautiful
space about you, all the time.
In your learning position,
in your teaching position,
in your quiet time.
You have that beautiful
through-line in your life.
Of-- What a wonderful
mentor your dad
is to you, and to many,
many, many people.
And I'm so honored to
have you both here,
and to share your
knowledge with us.
-Thank you.
-It's been a big pleasure.
It's been a pleasure of my own.
Thank you so much.
The pleasure has been mine.
It's been fun.
And where you going next?
Are you going to continue
to travel and teach?
-Ah, yes.
-Yes.
Yes.
-I can't stop right now.
OK.
Because it's too big
of a mission, right?
Well, it's what makes me happy.
It's where my passion is.
-You can tell.
I love to do this.
Yes, I can tell.
Well, thank you so much.
It's been a pleasure
to have you here.
And thank you for
joining me, both of you.
And if you would like to share
my interview with the Ruizes,
Don Miguel, Jr. and Don
Miguel, Sr., with your friends,
please go to GaiamTV.com.
You can share it with
your friends there.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.